Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are going to discuss salt,
also referred to as sodium.
Now, most of us think of salt
as something that we put on and in our food,
maybe something to avoid,
maybe some of you are actually trying to get more salt,
some of you are trying to get less salt.
We all seem to associate salt
with things like blood pressure, et cetera.
Today, we're going to go down
a different set of avenues related to salt.
We will certainly cover how salt regulates blood pressure.
We are also going to talk about
how the brain regulates our appetite for salt
or our aversion for salt.
We are also going to talk about
how our sensing of salty tastes
actually mediates how much sugar we crave
and whether or not we ingest more or less sugar
than we actually need.
So what you're going to learn today
is that the so-called salt system,
meaning the cells and connections in our brain and body
that mediate salt craving and avoidance
are regulating many, many aspects of our health
and our ability to perform in various contexts,
things like athletic performance,
things like cognitive performance.
We're also going to talk about aging and dementia
and avoiding aging and dementia
and what role salt and salt avoidance might play in that.
We're going to touch on some themes
that for some of you might seem controversial
and indeed, if they are controversial,
I'll be sure to highlight them as such.
I'm going to cover a lot of new data
that point to the possibility,
I want to emphasize the possibility that for some people,
more salt might help them in terms of health,
cognitive and bodily functioning.
And for other people, less salt is going to be better.
I'm going to talk about what the various parameters are.
I'm going to give you some guidelines
that in concert with your physician
who you should absolutely talk to
before adding or changing anything
to your diet or supplementation regime
can help you arrive at a salt intake
that's going to optimize your mental,
physical health and performance.
So we're going to cover neurobiology,
we're going to cover hormone biology,
we're going to talk about liver function,
we're going to talk about kidney function
and of course, brain function.
I'm excited to share this information with you today.
I'm certain you're going to come away
with a lot of information and actionable items.
I'm pleased to announce
that I'm hosting two live events this May.
The first live event will take place
in Seattle, Washington on May 17th.
The second live event will take place in Portland, Oregon
on May 18th.
Presale tickets for these two events
are now available at hubermanlab.com slash tour.
I should mention that while I do hope to visit other cities
in the near future to do more live events,
right now, these are the only two live events
I have scheduled, at least for the next six months.
So once again, if you go to hubermanlab.com slash tour,
you can access the presale tickets.
I hope to see you at these live events
and as always, thank you for your interest in science.
Before we dive into the topic of today's episode,
I want to highlight a really exciting new study.
This is a study from Diego Bohor's lab at Duke University.
The Bohor's lab studies interactions
between the gut and the brain
and has made some incredible discoveries
of the so-called neuropod cells.
Neuropod cells are neurons, nerve cells
that reside in our gut and that detect things
like fatty acids, amino acids,
and some neuropod cells sense sugar.
Previous work from this laboratory has shown
that when we ingest sugar,
these neuropod cells respond to that sugar
and send electrical signals up a little wire
that we call an axon through the vagus nerve,
for those of you that want to know, and into the brain
and through subsequent stations of neural processing,
evoke the release of dopamine.
Dopamine is a molecule known to promote craving
and motivation and indeed action.
And what these neuropod cells that send sugar
are thought to do is to promote seeking
and consumption eating of more sugary foods.
Now, the incredible thing is that it's all subconscious.
This is a taste system in the gut
that is not available to your conscious awareness.
Now, of course, when you ingest sweet foods,
you taste them on your mouth too.
And so part of the reason that you crave sweet foods perhaps
is because they taste good to you.
And the other reason is that these neuropod cells
are driving a chemical craving
below your conscious detection.
So they're really two systems.
Your gut is sensing at a subconscious level, what's in it
and sending signals to your brain that work in concert
in parallel with the signals coming from your mouth
and your experience of the taste of the food.
Now, that alone is incredible
and has been the subject of many important landmark papers
over the last decade or so.
You can imagine how the system would be very important
for things like hidden sugars,
when nowadays in a lot of processed foods,
they're putting hidden sugars,
they're putting a lot of things that cause your gut
to send signals to your brain
that make you crave more of those foods.
So for those of you that really love sugar,
just understand it's not just about how that sugar tastes.
The new study from the Borjas lab
deserves attention, I believe.
This is a paper published just recently,
February 25th, this year, 2022 in Nature Neuroscience,
an excellent journal.
And the title of the paper is the preference
for sugar over sweetener depends on a gut sensor cell.
The Borjas lab has now discovered a neuropod cell,
meaning a category of neurons,
that can distinguish between sweet things in the gut
that contain calories, for instance, sugar,
and things in the gut that are sweet
but do not contain calories, artificial sweeteners
like aspartame, sucralose, and so forth.
There are also, of course,
non-artificial non-caloric sweeteners
like stevia, monk fruit, et cetera.
They did not explore the full gallery
of artificial sweeteners.
What they did find, however,
ought to pertain to all forms
of sweet non-caloric substances.
What they discovered was that there is a signature pattern
of signals sent from the gut to the brain
when we ingest artificial or non-caloric sweeteners.
This is important because what it says is that
at a subconscious level,
the gut can distinguish between sweet things
that contain calories and sweet things that do not.
Now, what the downstream consequences of this sensing is
or what they are, isn't yet clear.
Now, I believe everyone should be aware
of these kinds of studies for a couple of reasons.
First of all, it's important to understand
that what you crave, meaning the foods you crave
and the drinks you crave,
is in part due to your conscious experience
of the taste of those things,
but also due to biochemical and neural events
that start in the body and impinge on your brain
and cause you to seek out certain things,
even though you might not know
why you're seeking out more sugar.
You find that you're craving a lot of sugar
or you're craving a lot of foods with artificial sweeteners
and you don't necessarily know why.
Now, artificial sweeteners themselves
are a somewhat controversial topic.
I want to highlight that.
Some months back, I described a study from Yale University
about how one can condition the insulin system.
Insulin is involved in mobilizing a blood sugar
and so forth in the body, as many of you know,
and I described some studies that were done
from Yale University School of Medicine,
looking at how artificial sweeteners
can actually evoke an insulin response
under certain conditions.
Now, a couple of key things.
I got a little bit of pushback after covering those studies
and I encourage pushback all the time.
Pushback is one of those things
that forces all of us to drill deeper into a topic.
I want to be clear.
First of all, I am not one to demonize artificial sweeteners.
There is evidence in animal models, in animal models,
that artificial sweeteners can disrupt the gut microbiome,
but those were fairly high doses of artificial sweeteners
and it's unclear if the same thing pertains to humans.
Still unclear, I should say,
has not been investigated thoroughly.
Some people don't like the taste of artificial sweeteners.
Some people do.
Some people find that they really help them
avoid excessive caloric intake.
Some people believe, and yet I should emphasize,
there still isn't evidence
that they can adjust the insulin response in all people.
I just want to repeat that three times
so that people are clear on that fact.
What these new data emphasize, however,
is that we need to understand how artificial sweeteners
are consumed at the level of the gut,
or I should say registered at the level of the gut
and how that changes brain function.
Because one thing that I'm familiar with
and that many people report
is that when they first taste artificial sweeteners,
they taste sort of not right to them.
They don't like the taste,
but over time, they actually start to crave that taste.
I've experienced this.
I used to drink a lot of diet sodas
when I was in graduate school, so this would be aspartame,
and I found that I actually needed them.
Now, maybe it was the caffeine.
Maybe I just liked the sweet taste or the carbonation.
We actually have a drive for carbonation,
which is the topic of a future episode,
but when I finally quit them
for reasons that were independent of any fear
of artificial sweeteners,
I found that I didn't like the taste.
Nowadays, I only occasionally drink a diet soda.
I usually do that if I'm on a plane
and there's nothing else available to me,
so I don't demonize them.
I might drink one every once in a while, no big deal.
I also want to be clear.
I consume stevia on a number of different supplements
and foods that I consume.
Stevia, of course, is a plant-based non-caloric sweetener,
so I myself consume artificial sweeteners.
Many people hate them.
Many people like them and find them useful
for their nutrition and, in fact,
to keep their caloric intake
in a range that's right for them,
and many people, like myself, are curious about them
and somewhat wary of them
and yet continue to consume them in small amounts.
I think most people probably fall into that category.
I should also mention that many food manufacturers
put artificial sweeteners, such as sucralose, et cetera,
into foods, and it's always been unclear
as to why they might want to do that,
and yet we know that the sweet taste consumption,
even if it doesn't contain calories,
can drive more craving of sweet food,
so there may be a logic or a strategy to why they do that.
Again, a topic for exploration on today's podcast
and in future podcasts,
because where we're headed today is a discussion
about how salt and salt sensing,
both consciously and unconsciously,
can adjust our craving for other things
like sugar and water and so on.
So I want to highlight this beautiful work
from the Moraes lab.
I will put a link to the study.
I want to open this as a chapter for further exploration.
I like to think that the listeners of this podcast
are looking for answers where we have answers,
but are also, I would hope,
excited about some of the new and emerging themes
in what we call nutritional neurobiology,
and indeed the Moraes lab really stands
as one of the premier laboratories out there
that's looking at how foods, as consumed in the gut,
are modifying our nervous system,
the foods we crave, and how we utilize those foods.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, now called AG1.
I've been taking AG1 since 2012,
so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started taking AG1
and the reason I still take AG1 once or twice a day
is that I find it to be the best way
to ensure I get all of my vitamins and minerals
and the probiotics I need.
I try and eat really well, but I'm not perfect about it,
and with Athletic Greens, AG1,
I cover any deficiencies I might have.
The probiotics are particularly important to me
because as we've talked about on many previous episodes
and we'll talk about more on today's episode,
the gut microbiome is supported by probiotics
and the gut microbiome supports many biological functions
important for immediate and long-term health,
things like immune system function,
things like the gut brain axis and mood and appetite
and so forth.
With Athletic Greens, I make sure all of those bases
are covered because of the probiotics.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs,
which make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road,
and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2.
Vitamin D3 is crucial for many aspects
of our immediate and long-term health,
and many people simply are not getting enough vitamin D3,
or the amounts they're getting are not optimal.
K2 is important for cardiovascular health
and for calcium regulation.
So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman,
you can claim the special offer, the five free travel packs
and a year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Element.
Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need
and none of the things you don't.
That means it has salt, magnesium and potassium,
so-called electrolytes, which are critical for neuronal
function and a lot of other biological functions.
As I mentioned on the podcast before, I'm a fan of salt.
I believe in ingesting appropriate amounts of salt,
and by appropriate, I mean,
depending on what your background blood pressure
happens to be, what your activity levels are,
how much you sweat,
what your cognitive and physical demands are.
Today, we're going to talk about how to determine
what those needs are.
I'm always trying to stay on top of my hydration,
and as you'll also learn about today,
salt and water intake and hydration are intimately related.
With Element, I'm sure to get the potassium, the sodium
and the magnesium that I need,
and I do that in a great tasting drink,
and as I mentioned before, it has no sugar.
If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement.com,
that's drinklmnt.com slash Huberman
to claim a free Element sample pack.
You only cover the cost of shipping,
otherwise it's completely free.
Again, that's drinkelementlmnt.com slash Huberman
to claim a free sample pack of Element.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I am a big fan of getting regular blood work done,
and I've been trying to do it
as much as I can afford for years.
The reason is that many of the factors
that impact our immediate and long-term health
can only be discovered from a quality blood test.
With most blood tests and DNA tests, however,
you get information back, but not a lot of information
about what to do with those numbers.
So if something's in high or low range,
you might get one or two generic recommendations,
things that you could easily look up online,
but you're not going to get a lot of specific recommendations.
With Inside Tracker,
they give you a lot of specific recommendations
as to lifestyle factors and nutrition factors,
supplementation factors,
things you may want to add to your life
or things you may want to delete from your life
in order to bring the numbers into the ranges
that are best for your immediate and long-term health.
There's simply no replacement for these kinds of data,
and your data are the most important data to you,
and quality blood tests and DNA tests
are the way to access them.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
That's insidetracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off.
Okay, let's talk about salt.
Salt has many, many important functions
in the brain and body.
For instance, it regulates fluid balance,
how much fluid you desire and how much fluid you excrete.
It also regulates your desire for salt itself,
meaning your salt appetite.
You have a homeostatically driven salt appetite.
I'll talk about the mechanisms today
and make them all very clear.
What that means is that you crave salty things,
beverages and foods, when your salt stores are low,
and you tend to avoid salty beverages and foods
when your salt stores are high,
although that's not always the case.
There are circumstances where you will continue
to crave salt even though you don't need salt
or indeed even if you need to eliminate salt
from your system.
Salt also regulates your appetite for other nutrients,
things like sugar, things like carbohydrates.
And today we'll explore all of that.
Technically, salt is a mineral.
And I should mention that when I say salt,
I am indeed referring to sodium in most cases,
although I will be clear to distinguish salt from sodium,
meaning table salt from sodium.
Most people don't realize this,
but one gram of table salt
contains about 388 milligrams of sodium.
So technically we should be talking about sodium today
and not salt.
I will use them interchangeably
unless I'm referring to some specific recommendations
or ideas about trying to define your ideal salt,
AKA sodium intake.
So this is important.
I think right off the bat,
a lot of people get themselves into a place of confusion
and potentially even to a place of trouble
by thinking that table salt in grams
always equates to sodium in grams.
And that's simply not the case.
Today we're going to explore the neural mechanisms
by which we regulate our salt appetite
and the way that the brain and body interact
in the context of salt seeking, salt avoidance,
how to determine when we need more salt,
when we need less salt.
We'll talk about kidney function.
We'll get into all of it
and we're going to do it very systematically.
So let's start in the brain.
We all harbor small sets of neurons.
We call these sets of neurons nuclei,
meaning little clusters of neurons
that sense the levels of salt in our brain and body.
There are a couple of brain regions that do this
and these brain regions are very, very special.
Special because they lack biological fences around them
that other brain areas have.
And those fences, or I should say that fence
goes by a particular name.
And that name is the blood brain barrier or BBB.
Most substances that are circulating around in your body
do not have access to the brain.
In particular, large molecules
can't just pass into the brain.
The brain is a privileged organ in this sense.
There are a couple of other organs that are privileged
and that have very strict barriers,
very particular fences, if you will.
And those other organs include things
like the ovaries and testes.
And that makes sense for the following reason.
First of all, the brain, at least most of the brain
cannot regenerate after injury.
You just simply can't replace brain cells after injury.
I know people get really excited about neurogenesis,
the birth of new neurons,
and indeed neurogenesis has been demonstrated
in animal models.
And to some extent it exists in humans in a few places.
For instance, the olfactory bulb
where neurons are responsible
for detecting odorants in the environment,
for smell that is.
And in a little sub region of the hippocampus,
a memory area, there's probably some neurogenesis.
But the bulk of really good data out there
point to the fact that in humans,
there's not much turnover of neurons.
What that means is that the neurons you're born with
are the ones that you're going to be using
most if not all of your life.
In fact, you're born with many more neurons
than you'll have later.
And there's a process of naturally occurring cell death
called apoptosis that occurs during development.
So you actually are born with many more neurons
than you have later in life.
And that's the reflection of a normal healthy process
of nerve cell elimination.
So the estimates vary,
but anywhere from a third to maybe even a half
or even two thirds of neurons,
depending on the brain area,
just going to die across development.
That might sound terrible,
but that's actually one of the ways
in which you go from being kind of like a little potato bug
flopping around helplessly in your crib
to being an organism that can walk and talk
and articulate and calculate math
or do whatever it is that you do for a living.
So the brain has a set of elements,
these nerve cells and other cells,
and it needs to use those for the entire lifespan.
So having a BBB, a blood-brain barrier around the brain
is absolutely critical.
The ovaries and testes have a barrier for,
we assume the reason that they contain the genetic material
by which we can pass on our genes to our offspring progeny,
meaning make children,
and those children will have our genes
or at least half of them.
The other half from the partner, of course.
If the cells within the ovaries and testes are mutated,
well, then you can get mutations and offspring.
So that's very costly in the evolutionary sense.
So it makes sense that you would have
a barrier from the blood.
So if you ingest what's called a mutagen,
if you ingest something that can mutate the genes of cells,
you can imagine why there would be a premium
on not allowing those mutagens to get into the brain,
the ovaries or the testes, okay?
So the brain has this BBB,
this blood-brain barrier around it,
which makes it very, very hard for substances
to pass into the brain unless those substances
are very small or those substances and molecules
are critically required for brain function.
However, there are a couple of regions in the brain
that have a fence around them, but that fence is weaker.
Okay, it's sort of like going from a really big wall,
thick electronic 24-hour surveillance fence
where nothing can pass through except only
the exclusive cargo that's allowed to go through
to having a little cyclone fence
with a couple of holes in it,
or it's a kind of a picket fence that's falling over
and substances can move freely from the blood
circulating in the body into the brain.
And it turns out that the areas of the brain
that monitor salt balance and other features
of what's happening in the body at the level
of what we call osmolarity, at the concentration of salt
reside in these little sets of neurons
that sit just on the other side of these weak fences.
And the most important and famous of these
for the sake of today's conversation is one called OVLT.
OVLT stands for the organum vasculosum
of the lateral terminalis.
It is what's called a circumventricular organ.
Why circumventricular?
Well, not to bog you down with neuroanatomy,
but your brain is a big squishy mass of neurons
and other cell types, but it has to be nourished.
And through the middle of that brain,
there is a tube, there's a hollow that creates spaces.
And those spaces are called ventricles.
The ventricles are spaces in which cerebral spinal fluid
circulates and it nourishes the brain.
It does a number of other things as well.
The circumventricular organs are areas of the brain
that are near that circulating fluid.
And that circulating fluid has access to the bloodstream
and the bloodstream has access to it.
And this structure that I'm referring to OVLT,
organum vasculosum of the lateral terminalis,
has neurons that can sense the contents of the blood
and to some extent, the cerebral spinal fluid.
There are a couple other brain areas
that can do this as well.
They go also by the name of circumventricular organs.
And I'll talk about the names of some of those other areas.
But for today, and I think for sake
of most of the discussion,
understand that the OVLT is special.
Why?
Because it doesn't have this thick barrier fence,
which sounds like a bad thing.
And yet it's a terrific border detector.
The neurons in that region are able to pay attention
to what's passing through in the bloodstream
and can detect, for instance,
if the levels of sodium in the bloodstream are too low,
if the level of blood pressure in the body
is too low or too high,
and then the OVLT can send signals to other brain areas.
And then those other brain areas
can do things like release hormones
that can go and act on tissues
in what we call the periphery in the body.
And for instance, have the kidneys secrete more urine
to get rid of salt, that's excessive salt in the body,
or have the kidneys hold on to urine
to hold on to whatever water or fluid that one might need.
So before I go any deeper into this pathway,
just understand that the OVLT has a very limited barrier.
It can detect things in the bloodstream.
And this incredible area of the brain
almost single-handedly sets off the cascades of things
that allow you to regulate your salt balance,
which turns out to be absolutely critical,
not just for your ability to think
and for your neurons to work, but indeed for all of life.
If the OVLT doesn't function correctly,
you're effectively dead or dead soon.
So this is a very important brain region.
So let's talk about the function of the OVLT
and flesh out some of the other aspects of its circuitry,
of its communication with other brain areas
and with the body.
In the context of something that we are all familiar with,
which is thirst.
Have you ever wondered just why you get thirsty?
Well, it's because neurons in your OVLT
are detecting changes in your bloodstream,
which detect global changes within your body.
And in response to that,
your OVLT sets off certain events within your brain and body
that make you either want to drink more fluid
or to stop drinking fluid.
There are two main kinds of thirst.
The first one is called osmotic thirst.
And the second is called hypovolemic thirst.
Osmotic thirst has to do with the concentration of salt
in your bloodstream.
So let's say you ingest something very, very salty.
Let's say you ingest a big bag of,
I confess I don't eat these very often,
but I really like those kettle potato chips
and they're pretty salty.
I've never actually measured how much sodium is in them.
I'm sure the information is there.
Every once in a while,
if I'm particularly interested in doing so,
I'll just down a bag of those things.
And I really like them and they're very salty,
but they almost always make me feel thirsty.
And the reason is that by eating those,
I've ingested a lot of sodium.
Again, not a frequent occurrence for me,
but happens every now and again.
And I don't have too much shame about that
because I think I have a pretty healthy relationship
to food and I enjoy them.
And I understand that it will drive salt levels
up in my bloodstream.
And that will cause me to be thirsty.
But why, why?
Because neurons in the OVLT come in two main varieties.
One variety senses the osmolarity of the blood
that's getting across that weak little fence
that we talked about before.
And when the osmolarity,
meaning the salt concentration in the blood is high,
it activates these specific neurons in the OVLT.
And by activates,
I mean it causes them to send electrical potentials,
literally send electrical signals to other brain areas.
And those other brain areas
inspire a number of different downstream events.
So what are those other brain areas?
Well, the OVLT signals to an area
called the supraoptic nucleus.
The name and why it's called the supraoptic nucleus
is not necessarily important.
It also signals to the so-called paraventricular nucleus,
another nucleus that sits near the ventricles
and can monitor the qualities,
the chemical qualities of the cerebral spinal fluid,
as well as probably the bloodstream as well.
And the consequence of that communication
is that a particular hormone is eventually released
from the posterior pituitary.
Now the pituitary is a gland
that sits near the roof of your mouth.
It releases all sorts of things like growth hormone
and luteinizing hormone.
Luteinizing hormone will stimulate things like estrogen
and testosterone production and release
from the ovaries and testes and so on.
The pituitary has a bunch of different compartments
and functions, but what's really cool about the pituitary
is that certain regions of the pituitary
actually contain the axons, the wires of neurons,
and the neurons reside in the brain.
And so the supraoptic nucleus gets a signal from the OVLT.
The signal is purely in the form of electrical activity.
Remember, neurons aren't talking to one another
about what's happening out there.
They're not saying, hey, there's too much salt
in the bloodstream, let's do something about it.
All they receive are so-called action potential,
waves of electricity.
The neurons in the supraoptic nucleus
then release their own electrical signals
within the pituitary and some of those neurons
and nearby neurons are capable of releasing hormones
as well as electrical signals.
So from the pituitary, there's a hormonal signal
that's released called vasopressin.
Vasopressin also goes by the name antidiuretic hormone
and antidiuretic hormone has the capacity
to either restrict the amount of urine that we secrete
or when that system is turned off
to increase the amount of urine that we secrete.
So there's a complicated set of cascades that's evoked
by having high salt concentration in the blood.
There's also a complicated set of cascades that are evoked
by having low concentrations of sodium in the blood.
But the pathway is nonetheless the same.
It's OVLT is detecting those osmolarity changes,
communicating to the supraoptic nucleus.
Supraoptic nucleus is either causing the release of
or is releasing vasopressin, antidiuretic hormone,
or that system is shut off
so that the antidiuretic hormone is not secreted,
which would allow urine to flow more freely, right?
Antidiuretic means anti-release of urine.
And by shutting that off,
you're going to cause the release of urine.
You're sort of allowing a system to flow, so to speak.
The second category of thirst is hypovolemic thirst.
Hypovolemic thirst occurs when there's a drop
in blood pressure, okay?
So the OVLT, as I mentioned before,
can sense osmolarity based on the fact
that it has these neurons that can detect
how much salt is in the bloodstream.
But the OVLT also harbors neurons
that are of the baroreceptor, mechanoreceptor category.
Now, more on baroreceptors and mechanoreceptors later,
but baroreceptors are essentially a receptor,
meaning a protein that's in a cell
that responds to changes in blood pressure.
So there are a number of things that can cause decreases
in blood pressure.
Some of those include, for instance,
if you lose a lot of blood, right?
If you're bleeding quite a lot,
or in some cases, if you vomit quite a lot,
or if you have extensive diarrhea,
or any combination of those.
And there are other things that can reduce blood volume,
and we will talk about some of those later.
But in the classic case of hypovolemic thirst,
one is simply losing blood,
and therefore blood pressure goes down.
So very simple to imagine in your mind,
you have these pipes,
which are the arteries, veins, and capillaries,
and when you lose some blood volume,
the pressure in those arteries,
veins, and capillaries goes down.
OVLT has neurons that can sense that reduction
in blood pressure because of the presence
of baroreceptors in OVLT.
There are other elements that also play into the response
to what we call hypovolemic thirst.
For instance, the kidney will secrete
something called renin.
Renin will activate something called angiotensin II
from the lungs of all things.
Amazing.
And angiotensin II itself can act on OVLT,
organum vasculosum and lateral terminalis,
which in turn will create thirst.
So in both cases,
the osmolarity sensing system,
meaning osmotic thirst,
and in hypovolemic thirst,
where blood pressure has dropped,
the end result is a desire to drink more.
And that desire to drink more comes through a variety
of pathways that are both direct and indirect,
include vasopressin and don't include vasopressin.
But I think for just sake of general example,
and even for those of you that don't have any biology
background or physiology background,
just understand that there are two main types of thirst.
Both types of thirst, osmotic thirst and hypovolemic thirst,
are not just about seeking water,
but they also are about seeking salt.
In very general terms,
salt, AKA sodium,
can help retain water.
Now that doesn't mean that salt always retains water.
If you have excessive amounts of salt,
will you retain excessive amounts of water?
Well, sort of, as we'll soon learn, it's all contextual.
But for most cases,
we can say that by having salt in our system,
our brain and our body can function normally,
provided the levels of salt are adequate
and not too high or too low.
And thirst, while we often think of it as just a way
to bring fluid into our body,
is designed as a kind of a interoceptive perception.
What I mean by that,
and interoception, as many of you know now
from listening to this podcast,
is a pang of attention or a recognition, rather,
a conscious recognition of the events
going on within our body.
So when we are thirsty,
it's a certain form of interoception.
We go, oh, I need something, or I crave something.
You may not know exactly what you need,
but when you are thirsty, you're not just seeking water.
You're also seeking to balance your osmolarity,
which means you may be seeking salty fluids or foods.
In some cases, you'll try and accomplish this by eating.
Or it may be that you're trying to avoid,
or you will be inspired to avoid salty fluids and foods.
But if you want to understand sodium
and its roles in the body, you have to understand thirst.
And if you want to understand thirst,
you have to understand how fluid balance
is regulated in the body.
That's not surprising at all.
But sodium and water work together
in order to generate what we call thirst.
Sodium and water work together
in order to either retain water
or inspire us to let go of water, to urinate.
So before we can dive into the specifics around salt
and how to use salt for performance
and various recommendations and things to avoid,
we need to drill a little bit deeper
into this fluid balance mechanism in the body.
And for that reason, we have to pay
at least a little bit of attention to the kidney.
The kidney is an incredible organ.
And one of the reasons the kidney is so amazing
is that it's responsible for both retaining, holding onto,
or allowing the release of various substances from the body.
Substances like glucose or amino acids, urea, uric acid,
salt, potassium, magnesium.
It's basically a filter,
but it's a very, very intelligent filter.
I mean, intelligent meaning it doesn't have its own mind,
but the way it works is really beautiful.
Basically, blood enters the kidney
and it goes through a series of tubes,
which are arranged into loops.
If you want to look more into this,
there's the beautiful loop of Henle
and other aspects of the kidney design
that allow certain substances to be retained
and other substances to be released,
depending on how concentrated
those substances are in the blood.
The kidney responds to a number of hormonal signals,
including vasopressin, in order to, for instance,
antidiuretic hormone, in order to hold on to more fluid,
if that's what your brain and body need.
And it responds to other hormonal signals as well.
So it's a pretty complex organ.
Nonetheless, there's a key point,
which I already mentioned,
that I think most people don't realize,
that this is actually something that I like to tell kids
when I meet them, provided that they're of appropriate age.
I'll say, oftentimes when kids learn that I'm a scientist,
they'll ask a question about something related to science
and hopefully, for my sake,
it's something about neuroscience.
But one thing that I'll tell kids, I'll say,
do you know that your urine,
your pee is actually filtered blood?
And occasionally that will really terrify a kid,
but that also occasionally really terrifies an adult.
But indeed, your urine is filtered blood.
They see blood gets into the kidney,
the kidney is going to filter out certain things,
certain things are going to be allowed to pass through
and others are not, okay?
So the way the kidney is designed is that about 90%
of the stuff that's absorbed from the blood
is going to be absorbed early in this series of tubes.
And only a small percentage is going to be regulated
or worked out as you get into what's called
the distal kidney.
Distal just means the furthest part away, okay?
The proximal is up close.
So like your shoulder is proximal
to your midline of your body and your hand is distal.
So in biological terms, you hear about proximal distal,
which just means near or far from.
So just to give a really simple example,
let's say that you are very low on fluid.
You haven't had much to drink in a while.
Maybe you're walking around on a hot day.
Chances are that the neurons in your OVLT
will sense the increase in osmolarity, right?
The concentration of salt is going to be increased
relative to the fluid volume that's circulating.
This of course assumes that you haven't excreted
a lot of sodium for one reason or another,
but that increase in osmolarity is detected by the OVLT.
The OVLT is going to signal a bunch of different cascades
through the super optic nucleus, et cetera.
And then vasopressin is going to be released
into the bloodstream and vasopressin,
again also called antidiuretic hormone,
is going to act on the kidney and change the kidney's
function in a couple of different ways,
some mechanical, some chemical, okay?
In order to make sure that your kidney
does not release much water,
doesn't make you want to urinate.
And in fact, even if you would try to urinate,
your body's going to tend to hold on to its fluid stores.
Okay, so very simple, straightforward example.
We can also give the other example whereby
if you were ingesting a lot, a lot, a lot of water,
and it's not a particularly hot day
and you're not sweating very much,
let's assume your salt intake is constant
or is low for whatever reason,
well then the osmolarity, the salt concentration
in your blood is going to be lower.
Your OVLT will detect that
because of these osmo-sensing neurons in your OVLT,
your OVLT will fail to signal to the super optic nucleus
and there will not be the release
of vasopressin antidiuretic hormone
and you can excrete all the water
that your body wants to excrete,
meaning you'll be able to urinate,
there's no holding on to water at the level of the kidney.
Okay, very simple examples,
but hopefully it illustrates how events within the blood,
meaning the concentration of salt
relative to the amount of fluid, right?
That's what osmolarity is, is detected by the OVLT.
The brain then communicates to the pituitary.
The pituitary sends a hormone out into the blood
and the hormone acts on the kidney
to either hold onto or let go of fluid,
meaning to prevent you from wanting to urinate
or from stimulating you to want to urinate.
Very, very simple kind of yes, no type situation here.
There's a lot of nuance to this in reality.
There are a lot of other hormones in this pathway,
but I think for at least this stage of the discussion,
this should be sufficient.
Some of you may have noticed
that a molecule we've been talking a lot about today,
vasopressin, was also mentioned on a previous episode
of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
but in a very different context.
The molecule I'm referring to is vasopressin
and as I mentioned, it's a hormone involved in antidiuresis,
meaning preventing urination.
It's an antidiuretic,
but we also talked about vasopressin in the context
of desire, love, and attachment.
We talked about it in the context of monogamy
and non-monogamy in a species of animal
called the prairie vole.
You can check out that episode.
I believe vasopressin and the non-monogamous prairie voles
are mentioned in the timestamp,
so it should be easy to find.
Vasopressin is made at multiple locations
in the nervous system, mainly the super optic nucleus,
and indeed, it's also involved in aspects
of sexual behavior and mating.
Now, it does that through mechanisms that are distinct
from its antidiuretic effects.
In fact, there are people who take vasopressin
as an aphrodisiac.
Now, I'm certainly not suggesting people do that,
but I have all the confidence in the world
that the moment I talk about vasopressin,
someone in the comments is going to say,
what do you think about vasopressin nasal sprays
and this kind of thing?
Vasopressin and indeed oxytocin,
another hormone that's involved in pair bonding
and various aspects of brain and body function,
are available as nasal sprays
that can get up into the deep recesses of the brain
and it can impact some of these core,
what we call hypothalamic functions,
these primitive drives and hypothalamic functions.
I would encourage a lot of caution,
maybe even extreme caution in recreational use
of things like vasopressin and oxytocin,
unless you are working with an MD, excuse me,
and they prescribe it,
or they really know what they're doing.
These are powerful hormones
that have a lot of different effects on the brain and body.
The way that vasopressin, meaning antidiuretic hormone,
prevents the release of fluid as urine from the body
is pretty interesting.
It acts directly on the kidney.
So as I mentioned before, blood flows into the kidney,
a number of things are retained
in the early part of the kidney.
Vasopressin acts at a fairly distal,
meaning kind of end game,
part of the loops of tubes through the kidney,
and it increases the permeability of those tubes.
In other words, it makes sure that the fluid
that would otherwise pass into a collecting duct
and then go out to the bladder
never actually makes it to the bladder.
I point this out because what antidiuretic hormone does
is it prevents the bladder from filling at all.
It's not as if it locks fluid in the bladder
and prevents you from urinating.
I think the way I've been describing things up until now
and the way you'll hear about antidiuretic hormone,
it might sound like it kind of locks up the bladder,
prevents you from being able to urinate,
but you have a full bladder.
That would be very uncomfortable.
That's not the way it works.
It actually causes the tubes headed towards the bladder
from the kidney to become permeable,
meaning to allow fluid to go back into the bloodstream,
into the rest of the body,
so that fluid never actually fills the bladder
and so you never feel the urge to urinate.
Now, this is an episode about salt.
A key thing to understand about the kidney
is that the kidney uses sodium in order to conserve water,
which has everything to do with the fact
that sodium can actually hold water.
Put differently, water tends to follow sodium.
So where we have sodium, we tend to have water
and sodium when it's concentrated can hold on to water.
And that's one of the main ways
that the kidney holds on to water in the body.
And as we'll soon learn,
there is no simple and direct formula to say, for instance,
okay, if salt levels are high, a lot of water is retained.
And if salt levels are low, a lot of water is released.
On the one hand, that can be true,
but it's also the case because these systems are homeostatic,
meaning they're always seeking balance,
both within system, within the salt system,
and between systems, the salt and water system,
it's also the case often that if we have enough sodium,
well, then we can secrete sodium and some water will follow.
Or if we don't have enough sodium, then yes, indeed,
because we're not holding on to water,
more fluid can be excreted.
But if that condition of low sodium lasts long enough,
then we start to retain water
because the body recognizes, ah, salt is low
and water is being excreted
and eventually a system will kick in to retain water.
So I'd love to give you a simple black and white
yes or no answer for low sodium, high sodium,
moderate sodium and water balance, but it's all contextual.
And when I say contextual, I mean,
it will depend on blood pressure, hypertension,
pre-hypertension if that's there, maybe normal tension,
hormone levels, exercise, et cetera, et cetera.
A pretty good example of how complicated this can all be
is one that some of you may be familiar with.
It's pretty well known that during certain phases
of the menstrual cycle, when estrogen and progesterone
and other hormones are fluctuating,
that water can be retained in the body.
It's what's called edema or a swelling sometimes.
So the common assumption, and indeed it can be true,
that when estrogen levels are high,
there's water retention in the body.
Also in males, if estrogen levels are high,
there can be water retention in the body.
This is one of the reasons why athletes
and in particular bodybuilders who take anabolic steroids
like testosterone, which can be converted into estrogens,
sometimes they'll walk around,
they look like they were partially inflated,
they look like they're going to pop,
and it looks like a swelling of the skin,
not just because they have large muscles.
And that's not always, but often water retention
due to testosterone conversion into estrogen.
Now, that all sounds consistent, right?
Estrogen levels fluctuated in the menstrual cycle,
in males where there's an increase in estrogen,
there's retention of water,
but actually estrogen acts as a diuretic.
So one would think, okay, when estrogen levels go up,
there should be a lot of fluid excreted.
But I bring up this example to point out
that it's a very complicated and dynamic balance
between hormones and salt and fluid.
You can't draw a one-to-one relationship there.
And that turns out to be a very important point,
and we can use that not as a way
to further complicate things,
but as a way to understand under which context,
less sodium intake or more sodium intake can be beneficial.
So that's where I'd like to turn our attention now.
So how much salt do we need and what can we trust
in terms of trying to guide our ingestion of salt?
First of all, I want to be very, very clear
that there are a number of people out there
that have pre-hypertension or hypertension.
You need to know if you have pre-hypertension
or hypertension.
You need to know if you have normal tension,
meaning normal blood pressure.
Everyone should know their blood pressure
is an absolutely crucial measurement
that has a lot of impact on your immediate
and long-term health outcomes.
It informs a lot about what you should do.
Should you be doing more cardiovascular exercise?
Should you be ingesting more or less salt?
Should you be adjusting any number
of different lifestyle factors?
So you need to know that.
And without knowing what your blood pressure is,
I can't give a one-size-fits-all recommendation.
And indeed, I'm not going to give medical recommendations.
I'm simply going to spell out what I know about the research,
which hopefully will point you in the direction
of figuring out what's right for you
in terms of salt and indeed fluid intake.
There is a school of thought
that everybody is consuming too much salt.
And I do want to highlight the fact that there are dozens,
if not hundreds of quality papers that point to the fact
that a quote-unquote high salt diet can be bad
for various organs and tissues in the body,
including the brain.
It just so happens that because fluid balance,
both inside and outside of cells is crucial,
not just for your heart and for your lungs
and for your liver and for all the organs of your body,
but also for your brain,
that if the salt concentration inside of cells
in your brain becomes too high, neurons suffer, right?
They will draw fluid into those cells
because water tends to follow salt, as I mentioned before,
and those cells can swell.
You can literally get swelling of brain tissue.
Conversely, if salt levels are too low inside of cells
in any tissue of the body, but in the brain included,
then the cells of the body and brain can shrink
because water is pulled into the extracellular space
away from cells.
And indeed, under those conditions,
brain function can suffer.
And indeed, the overall health of the brain can suffer.
So there are many reports out there indicating,
both in experimental models and to some extent in humans,
that overconsumption of salt is bad
for brain function and longevity.
And yet there's also decent evidence
in both animal models and humans
that if salt consumption is too low,
then brain health and longevity will suffer,
as will other organs and tissues of the body.
So like most things in biology,
you don't want things too high or too low.
Now, I would say that the vast majority of studies out there
point to the fact that a high salt diet
is detrimental to brain health and function.
Most of the studies have focused on that aspect
of salt balance and its consequences on brain function.
One critical issue with many of those studies, however,
is that the high salt diet is often coupled
to other elements of diet that are also unhealthy,
things like excessively high levels of carbohydrates
or fats or combinations of carbohydrates and fats.
And so while I know there are many burning questions
out there about how much salt one needs
if they are on a low carbohydrate diet,
or if they are fasting, or if they are on a vegan diet,
there have simply not been many studies
that have explored the low, moderate,
and high salt conditions
on a backdrop of very controlled nutrition.
And that's probably reflective of the fact
that there are not a lot
of very well-controlled nutrition studies out there.
There are some, of course,
but it's very hard to get people to adhere
to nutritional plans in a very strict way,
and to do that for sufficient periods of time
that would allow the various health outcomes to occur.
Nonetheless, there's some interesting reports
that indicate that the amount of salt intake
can indeed predict health outcomes,
or what we call hazardous events,
things like cardiovascular events and stroke and so forth.
And what's interesting is that indeed a lower,
I'm not saying low, right,
because I don't believe that you want your diet
to be truly low in anything except perhaps poison,
but a lower salt diet can reduce
the number of these so-called hazardous events,
but it's a somewhat of a shallow U-shaped function
such that yes, indeed,
a high salt intake can be very detrimental
for your health, both in terms of cardiovascular events,
stroke, and other deleterious health events,
but somewhere in the middle
that actually sits quite to the right,
meaning higher than what is typically recommended
for salt intake,
can actually reduce the number of these hazardous events.
At least some reports point to that.
And so I want to emphasize
what one of those particular reports says,
and I also want to be sure to counter it
from the perspective of the context
that that study was set in,
because again, my goal here is not to give you
a strict set of recommendations at all,
is to point you to the literature,
try and make that literature as clear as possible
and allow you to evaluate for yourself.
And I don't just say that to protect us,
I say that to protect you,
because indeed you are responsible
for your health and your health choices.
So the paper that I'm referring to,
it's a very interesting one.
We of course never want to put too much weight
on any one report,
but this is a paper that was published in 2011
in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
The title of the paper is
Urinary Sodium and Potassium Excretion
and a Risk of Cardiovascular Events.
We have not talked much about potassium yet,
but sodium and potassium tend to work in concert
in the brain and body
in order to regulate various physiological functions
and health,
and we'll talk more about potassium as time goes on.
The key plot or set of data in this study,
for those of you that want to look it up,
we will link to it.
And there are a lot of data in here,
but it's figure one,
which is basically evaluating
the amount of urinary excretion of sodium,
which is a somewhat indirect,
but nonetheless valuable measure
of how much sodium people were ingesting.
And plotted against that
is what they call the hazard ratio.
And the hazard ratio points to
the composite of cardiovascular death stroke,
myocardial infarction,
and an infarct is an injury
and hospitalization for congestive heart failure.
And what it points to is the fact that the hazard ratio
is low-ish at sodium excretion
of about two grams per day,
but then continues to go down
until about 4.5 to five grams per day.
Remember, this is sodium excretion,
so it's reflective of how much sodium was in the body,
which is reflective of how much sodium was ingested.
And then the hazard ratio increases fairly dramatically,
a very steep slope,
heading anywhere from seven to eight to 10
and out towards 12 grams of sodium excretion per day.
So the simplest way to interpret these data
are that at fairly low levels of sodium,
meaning at about two grams per day,
you run fewer health risks,
but the number of risks continues to decline
as you move towards four and five grams per day.
And then as you increase your salt intake further,
then the risk dramatically increases.
So no study is holy,
nor is any figure in any study
or any collection of studies holy.
Rather, we always want to look at what the bulk of data
in a particular field reveal.
Nonetheless, I think the plot that we described,
meaning the graph that we described is pretty interesting
in light of the 2020 to 2025 dietary recommendations
for Americans, which is that people consume
no more than 2.3 grams,
meaning 2,300 milligrams of sodium per day.
That's about a half a teaspoon of salt per day.
Now, most people are probably consuming more than that
because of the fact that they are ingesting processed foods
and processed foods tend to have more salt in them
than non-processed foods.
Now, of course, that's not always the case, right?
Sea salt is not a processed food in most cases.
And there are a lot of unprocessed foods
that can be high in sodium,
but processed foods in particular
tend to have a lot of sodium.
You can see this simply by looking at the packaging
of any number of different foods.
But if we were to take this number of 2.3 grams,
that's the recommended cutoff for ingestion of sodium,
it actually falls in a portion of the curve
that we were talking about a moment ago
that indeed is associated
with low incidents of hazardous outcomes,
cardiovascular events, stroke, et cetera.
But according to that plot,
the ingestion of four or five grams of sodium,
almost double or more sodium than is currently recommended,
is associated with even lower numbers of hazardous events.
So we need to think about this
and we need to explore it in the context
of other studies, of course.
And we need to evaluate it in terms of this thing
that we've been going back to again and again,
which is context, right?
These recommendations of 2.3 gram per day cutoff
is in the context of a landscape
where some people do indeed have hypertension
or pre-hypertension.
The incidence of hypertension has gone up dramatically
in the last 100 years and seems to continue to go up.
Whether or not that's because of increased salt intake
or whether or not it's because of increased salt intake
and other things such as highly processed foods,
that isn't clear.
Again, pointing to the challenge
in doing these epidemiological studies
and really parsing what aspects of a change
in some health metric is due to, for instance,
the ingestion of more sugars versus more salts
or simply because of the ingestion of more salts.
It's a complicated, almost barbed wire topic by now,
but we can start to pull apart that barbed wire tangle
and start to evaluate some of the other people
in other conditions that exist out there,
maybe for you, that actually warrant more sodium intake
and where more sodium intake might actually be beneficial.
So again, I want to be very, very clear
that you need to know your blood pressure.
If you have high blood pressure or you're pre-hypertensive,
you should be especially cautious about doing anything
that increases your blood pressure.
And as always, you want to, of course,
talk to your doctor about doing anything
that could adjust your health in any direction.
But nonetheless, there are some important papers
that have been published in recent years.
I want to point to one of them in particular.
This is a paper that was published
in the journal Autonomic Neuroscience, Basic and Clinical,
because this paper, like several other papers,
ask the question, and indeed they asked the question
in the title, it's a review, dietary sodium and health,
how much is too much for those with orthostatic disorders?
Now, orthostatic disorders come
in a bunch of different varieties,
and we're going to talk about those in a moment,
but there are a number of people out there
that have low blood pressure, right?
People that get dizzy when they stand up,
people that are feeling chronically fatigued,
and in some cases, not all, those groups can actually benefit
from increasing their sodium intake.
Several episodes ago on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
I gave it what it's just clearly what we call anecdata,
which is not even really data, it's just anecdotal data,
of an individual who was always feeling hungry
and craving sugar, and based on the fact
that they also had low blood pressure,
I had them talk to a physician and they got permission
to try a little mini experiment on themselves,
and so they did, and that mini experiment was,
anytime they felt like they were craving sugar
or they were feeling a little lightheaded and dizzy,
rather than reaching for something with caloric intake,
they took a little bit of sea salt,
a little pinch of sea salt, and put it into some water
and drank it, or in the case of this individual,
they would actually take a little sea salt packet
and they would actually just down a sea salt packet,
and for them, that provided tremendous relief
for their dizziness, but that, of course,
was in the context of somewhat abnormally
low blood pressure, so I don't think that they are alone
in the fact that many people out there suffer
from a low blood pressure condition, many people out there
suffer from a high blood pressure condition,
so know your blood pressure and understand
that blood pressure in part is regulated
by your sodium intake and your sodium balance, why?
Well, because of the osmolarity of blood
that we talked about before,
where if you have a certain concentration of sodium,
meaning sufficient sodium in your bloodstream,
that will tend to draw water into the bloodstream
and essentially the pipes that are your capillaries,
arteries, and veins will be full,
the blood pressure will get up to your head,
whereas some people, their blood pressure is low
because the osmolarity of their blood is low,
and that can have a number of downstream consequences,
I should also mention it can be the consequence itself
of challenges or even deficits in kidney function,
but all of these organs are working together,
so the encouragement here is not necessarily
to ingest more sodium, it's to know your blood pressure
and to address whether or not an increase in sodium intake
would actually benefit your blood pressure
in a way that could relieve some of the dizziness
and other symptoms of things like orthostatic disorders,
but of course, to do that in a safe context
and to never play games with your blood sugar
or your blood osmolarity that could set your system
down a cascade of negative events,
let's look at what the current recommendations are
for people that suffer from orthostatic disorders
like orthostatic hypo, meaning too low tension,
orthostatic hypotension, postural tachycardia syndrome,
sometimes referred to as POTS, P-O-T-S,
or idiopathic orthostatic tachycardia and SYNCOPE,
these have the incredibly elaborate names,
those groups are often told to increase their salt intake
in order to combat their symptoms,
the American Society of Hypertension recommends
anywhere from 6,000 to 10,000, these are very high levels,
so this is six grams to 10 grams of salt per day,
keeping in mind, again, that salt is not the same as sodium,
so that equates to about 2,400 to 4,000 milligrams
of sodium per day, again, if you want to learn more
about this and get more of the citations,
I'll refer you back to this study on dietary sodium
and health, how much is too much
for those with orthostatic disorders,
we will put a link to this in the caption show notes,
so that's not just in the US, the salt recommendations
from the Canadian Cardiovascular Society
are 10,000 milligrams of salt per day,
so four grams of sodium is what that equates to,
and on and on and on for things like POTS
for these postural syndromes that result from,
or I should say from the syndromes
that involve low blood pressure
when people stand up or in certain postures,
so I point out this paper
and I point out these higher salt recommendations
to emphasize, again, that context is vital, right,
that people with high blood pressure
are going to need certain amounts of salt intake,
people with lower blood pressure
and maybe with some of these postural orthostatic syndromes
are going to need higher amounts of salt,
and for most people out there,
you're going to need to evaluate how much salt intake
is going to allow your brain and body to function optimally,
and there are some fairly straightforward ways
to explore that, and there's some ways to explore that
in the context of what you already know
about thirst and salt appetite
that can make that exploration
one in which it's not going to be a constant
wandering around in the dark
and where you can figure out what's right for you.
For most people, a moderate increase in salt intake
is not going to be detrimental
provided that you consume enough fluids,
in particular, water, okay,
meaning if you happen to overeat salt a bit,
you will get thirsty, you will ingest more water,
and you will excrete the excess sodium.
There is evidence that the body can store sodium
in various organs.
That storage of sodium may or may not be
a detrimental thing.
In general, excess storage of sodium
in tissues and organs of the brain and body
is not thought to be good for long-term health,
so eating much more sodium than you need
for long periods of time is indeed bad for you.
Earlier, I mentioned that salt
and your hunger and thirst for salt
is homeostatically regulated,
and indeed, that's the case,
much like temperature is homeostatically regulated.
What that means is if you pay attention to it,
if your salt levels are low,
you will tend to crave salt
and salty beverages and salty foods,
and in most cases, you should probably follow that craving
provided those salty beverages and salty foods
are not bringing in a lot of other things
or anything, ideally, that's bad for you,
so I think it's fair to say
that whether or not you're vegan, vegetarian,
carnivore, omnivore,
that we should all try to limit
our ingestion of processed foods.
My read of the literature is that, sure,
some processed foods are acceptable for us
and aren't going to kill us outright,
but that for most people in the world,
eating fewer processed foods
is just going to be a good thing to do,
so following your salt hunger and thirst, in most cases,
is going to be beneficial
provided that it's in the context
of eating healthy non-processed foods
on whatever backdrop of nutritional
and dietary recommendations is right for you.
I simply can't tell you what to eat and what not to eat
because I acknowledge the fact that some people are vegans
because of ethical reasons related to animals,
or some people are vegans
because of reasons related to the climate
and the environment.
Other people do it for specific health reasons.
Likewise, I know plenty of people that eat meat
and avoid vegetables, believe it or not,
and I know people that eat both,
and they do this often each, I should say,
all citing literature that supports their particular camp
and their particular view.
It's not a territory I want to get into,
but with respect to salt intake
and the fact that salt intake is homeostatically regulated,
it is the case that if you're craving salt,
you probably need it.
So for those of you that are sweating excessively,
or even if you're in a very hot environment
and you're not exercising and you're just losing,
you're losing water and salt from your system,
remember also that you can be in a very cold environment,
very cold, dry environments often go together,
and you can be losing a lot of fluids from your body
and you will crave fluids and salt even though it's cold
and you're not actually noticeably perspiring.
So if you're exercising a lot,
if you're in a particular cold, dry environment
or a particular hot environment,
you ought to be ingesting sufficient amounts
of salt and fluid.
A rule of thumb for exercise-based replenishment of fluid
comes from what I, some episodes back,
referred to as the Galpin equation.
The Galpin equation, I named it after Andy Galpin,
and I think that is the appropriate attribution there.
Andy Galpin is an exercise physiologist
at Cal State Fullerton, I believe,
and he's going to be a podcast guest
here on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
He's an exceptional muscle physiologist.
He also lives in the practical realm
where he gives recommendations about exercise
to expert athletes, as well as the everyday person.
So the Galpin equation is based on the fact
that we lose about one to five pounds of water per hour,
which can definitely impact our mental capacity
and our physical performance.
And the reason that loss of water from our system
impacts mental capacity and physical performance
has a lot to do with literally the changes
in the volume of those cells, the size of those cells,
based on how much sodium is contained
in or outside those cells,
and something that I've alluded to before on the podcast
and I'll talk about more in a moment,
which is that neurons signal to one another
by way of electricity
through something called the action potential,
and that actually requires sodium and potassium
and magnesium.
So the Galpin equation suggests
that we start exercise hydrated with electrolytes,
not just with water.
So that means water that has some sodium,
potassium, and magnesium.
There are simple low cost ways to do that we'll talk about.
And the formula for hydration,
the so-called Galpin equation is your body weight in pounds
divided by 30 equals the ounces of fluid
you should drink every 15 minutes.
That may turn out to be more fluid
than you can comfortably consume
during the activity that you're performing.
Now, the Galpin equation is mainly designed for exercise,
but I think is actually a very good rule of thumb
for any time that you need to engage mental capacity,
not just physical performance.
Your body weight in pounds divided by 30
equals the ounces of fluid you should drink every 15 minutes
does not necessarily mean you have to ingest it
every 15 minutes on the dot.
And I think many activities, physical activities,
but also cognitive activities like Zoom meetings
or in-person meetings or lecturing or running or cycling
are going to make it complicated
to ingest the appropriate amount of fluid
every 15 minutes on the dot.
I'm not going to speak for Andy, for Dr. Galpin,
but I think he would probably agree
that these are averages to shoot for
and that unless you're hyper neurotic,
the idea is to make sure that you're entering the activity,
cognitive or physical, sufficiently hydrated,
and that throughout that activity,
you're hydrating regularly.
And it points to the fact
that most people are probably under hydrating,
but not just under hydrating
from the perspective of not ingesting enough water,
that they're probably not getting enough electrolytes
as well, sodium, potassium, and magnesium.
So I've said two somewhat contradictory things.
On the one hand, I said, follow your salt appetite,
follow your salt thirst.
If you're craving salt,
ingest some salt until you stop craving the salt.
On the other hand, I've given you this
fairly specific recommendation based on the Galpin equation
that you should ingest your body weight in pounds
divided by 30, that's how many ounces of fluid
you should drink every 15 minutes,
which I'm guessing for most people is going to be more fluid
than they're currently drinking on average.
And so how could it be that you can have a recommendation
for what's optimal that's different
than the amount that you would reflexively drink?
And it has to do with the fact
that a lot of the hormone systems like vasopressin,
antidiuretic hormone, other hormones like aldosterone,
and a lot of the neural and hormonal signals
that govern salt and water balance
are fairly slow to kick in.
So for instance, if you eat a fairly salty meal
and you sense that salt, you'll probably,
meaning you detect it and perceive it,
because the food tastes salty,
you'll probably want to drink
a fair amount of fluid with it.
Whereas if some of the salt is disguised by other flavors,
something that we'll talk about in a few minutes
when we talk about the neural representation
of things like salty and sweet,
well, then you might not notice that something's salty,
and then a few minutes or hours after ingesting that meal,
you might feel very, very tired.
You might even wonder whether or not
it's because of some blood sugar effect.
Maybe it's a crash in blood sugar, you might think,
or something else related to that meal,
or maybe you think it's because of
some other event in your life,
but actually what has happened is you're dehydrated
because you didn't recognize
that you needed to drink more fluids.
So I want to acknowledge the contradiction
in the idea that everything is homostatically regulated,
and therefore you are aware of what you need,
and the counterargument that ah,
you need to follow these strict recommendations,
it's actually going to be somewhere in between.
And of course, your body and brain can start to adapt
to certain levels of salt intake.
There's a now fairly famous study that was done in Germany,
which looked at different phases of salt intake,
meaning they had subjects ingest
either 12 grams of salt per day or nine grams per day
or six grams per day for fairly long periods of time,
and they collected urine for testing.
This was actually a very controlled study.
I'm just going to paraphrase
from the National Institutes of Health report on this study
because they did a very nice writeup of it.
And they say that a big surprise of these results
is that whatever the level of salt that was consumed,
sodium was stored and released from the subjects bodies
in fairly regular weekly and monthly patterns,
meaning people tended to adapt
to a certain level of salt intake,
and then it led to a fairly constant amount
of salt retention and urine fluid excretion.
And that's because of the various hormones like aldosterone,
which regulates sodium excretion from the kidney
and glucocorticoids,
which we'll talk about more in a moment,
which help regulate metabolism.
Glucocorticoids are released from the adrenal glands,
which ride the top of the kidneys.
And there's a very close relationship
between the stress system, glucocorticoids,
and the salt system.
So the reason why your salt appetite
isn't a perfect readout of how much salt you should ingest
and why it might be helpful
to follow some of these formulas like the Galpin equation,
especially if you're engaging in exercise,
where you're going to be perspiring, of course,
is that your body will tend to adapt
to a certain amount of salt intake over time,
and then your appetite for salt
won't necessarily be the best indication
of how much salt you should ingest or avoid.
Before I move on, I want to really reemphasize the fact
that inside of the Galpin equation,
there is that mention of every 15 minutes,
and people have come back to me again and again
about this saying,
I can't drink that much water every 15 minutes.
It's too much volume of fluid in my stomach.
I can't run with that, et cetera.
Remember, these are averages.
So that's what you want to average
around a particular activity.
These are not strict recommendations
where a buzzer goes off and every 15 minutes,
you have to chug that exact amount
of electrolyte-containing solution.
Another key feature of the study
that I was referring to before,
which incidentally was published
in the Journal of Clinical Investigation,
is that the body regulates its salt and water balance
not just by excreting sodium,
but by retaining or releasing water.
And this is because of the relationship
between sodium and water that we were talking about before.
And the advantage of this mechanism they state,
here I'm paraphrasing,
is that the long-term maintenance of body fluids
is not as dependent on external water as once believed.
What the system probably evolved to do
was to adjust to different levels of sodium availability
in the environment.
And that raises a really key element of salt
and its importance in human history
and human evolution and human health.
We haven't talked too much about this,
and there are several very good books
about the history of salt.
You know, salt was a very valuable
and heavily sought-after substance
throughout much of human history,
so much so that there are actually written reports
of people being paid for labor in the form of salt.
And, you know, salt, when it's scarce,
has been quite expensive in certain regions of the world,
especially regions located further away from the sea.
And a friend of mine who has deep roots
within the culinary community told me about traveling
to some somewhat impoverished areas of Europe
some years ago and going into homes
where in the middle of the kitchen table,
there was a fish, a salty fish,
hanging from a thread above the table.
And that because of a lack of availability of table salt,
the common practice was to take any food
that needed some salt for additional flavoring
and to actually rub that food on this salty fish
or to squeeze the fish a bit onto the food substance
in order to get salt from it.
So, you know, that's a very kind of extreme example.
Nowadays, we kind of take salt for granted
and most of the discussion out there is about excess salt.
But as I'm pointing out that, you know,
salt for a long time has been a very sought-after commodity
and one that people really cherished for their health.
In the episode that I did on metabolism,
I talked about the relationship between salt and iodine.
If you're interested in iodine
and whether or not iodized salt or non-iodized salt
is best or required,
I'd encourage you to listen to that episode,
which was about, again, metabolism.
Some people may need more iodine intake.
Some people perhaps do not.
Some people might even want to ingest things like kelp.
Some people might not.
So please listen to that episode
if you're interested in the iodine aspects of salt,
which have direct impact on thyroid hormone
and thyroid function, which of course relates to metabolism.
Nowadays, there's a lot of interest in
and even a kind of proliferation
of what I call fancy salts.
So whether or not you should be ingesting sea salts
or whether or not common table salt will suffice.
In most cases, for what we're discussing here,
common table salt is fine,
but I should point out that sea salt
often contains other minerals, which can be very useful,
and we will do entire episodes on those other minerals.
So sea salt can contain, you know,
dozens or more of minerals,
some of which can be quite valuable to our health,
others of which are less important
and only need to be consumed in trace amounts,
but you're not going to get many minerals, if any,
from common table salt,
and that's why in addition to the pretty colors
and perhaps some people report
that they actually taste better,
some of these so-called fancy salts or sea salts,
you might want to consume a more advanced form of salt,
if you will.
Although I suppose it's actually
the more primitive form of salt
if it's actually the one that comes from the ocean.
So we've all heard about how excess salt,
it's bad for blood pressure,
damage the heart, the brain, et cetera.
I do want to give some voice to situations
where too little salt can actually cause problems,
and this has everything to do with the nervous system.
So without getting into excessive amounts of detail,
the kidneys, as we talked about before,
are going to regulate salt and fluid balance.
The adrenal glands, which ride atop the kidneys,
are going to make glucocorticoids like aldosterone,
and those are going to directly impact
things like fluid balance.
And in part, they do that by regulating
how much craving for and tolerance
of salty solutions we have.
And there's some really nice studies
that have looked at so-called adrenalectomies.
Now, this is an extreme case,
and it's typically done in animal models,
but it illustrates the role of the adrenals
in salt preference.
Basically, when the glucocorticoid system,
meaning the release of these particular hormones
from the adrenal glands,
is eliminated by adrenalectomy,
ectomy means removal,
then the threshold for what's considered too salty
really shifts, okay?
So typically, when the adrenals are intact,
a animal or a human will prefer a mildly salty
to moderately salty solution if given a choice.
And at some point, it's so salty
that it just feels aversive.
Just like taking a gulp of seawater
is almost always aversive.
I can't think of an instance where it's not aversive,
and actually drinking seawater can kill you
because of the high osmolarity of seawater.
You certainly don't want to drink seawater.
Under conditions where the adrenals are missing,
animals and humans will tend to prefer
a higher sodium concentration fluid,
and they will be willing to tolerate ingesting
very high concentrations of sodium.
Now, that's a very crude experiment
and not one that you want to do, I promise you.
But I mention it because it illustrates
the very direct relationship between the stress system,
which is the glucocorticoid system,
and the salt craving system.
And this actually makes sense.
Earlier, as we were talking about hypovolemic thirst,
when there's a loss of blood pressure from,
usually due to a loss of blood from the body,
there's a salt craving in order
to bring that blood volume back up,
because by ingesting salt,
you bring fluid into the bloodstream,
you're increasing that blood pressure
and you can restore the blood that's lost.
Now, there are many examples where if sodium levels
get too low in the bloodstream,
either because people are ingesting too little salt
or they are ingesting too much water
and therefore excreting too much salt,
that it can cause stress and anxiety.
There's some really nice data that point to the fact
that low dietary sodium can actually exacerbate anxiety
in animal models.
And to some extent,
there's evidence for this in humans as well.
And that should not come as a surprise.
The whole basis for a relationship
between the adrenal system, these glucocorticoids,
things like aldosterone, and the craving for sodium,
is that the stress system is a generic system
designed to deal with various challenges to the organism,
to you or to me or to an animal.
And those challenges can arrive in many different forms.
They can be an infection, it can be famine,
it can be lack of water and so on.
But in general, the stress response
is one of elevated heart rate, elevated blood pressure,
and an ability to maintain movement
and resistance to that challenge, okay?
I've said this before, but I'll emphasize it again.
There's this common misperception that stress makes us sick.
And indeed, if stress lasts too long,
it has a number of negative effects on our health.
But more often than not, if we're pushing, pushing, pushing,
we're studying or taking care of somebody
or traveling like crazy,
we don't tend to get sick under those conditions.
But as soon as we stop,
as soon as we reduce our adrenaline output,
as soon as we reduce our glucocorticoid output
from our adrenals, then we will get sick.
That's a very common occurrence.
And it's because stress actually activates our immune system
in the short term.
So I'd like to try and dispel this myth
that stress actually suppresses the immune system,
at least not in the short term.
For long-term stress, it's a different issue.
You don't want long-term ongoing stress,
especially if several weeks or more.
Nonetheless, it makes sense that bringing sodium
into the body would be at least one way
that we would be wired to counteract
or to resist stressors, right?
Stressors being the things on the outside coming at us.
So it could be stressful relationships,
stressful job situation, and again, infection and so on.
It's clear from a number of studies
that if sodium levels are too low,
that our ability to meet stress challenges is impaired.
Now, that doesn't mean
to place your sodium intake cosmically high,
but it does point to the fact that if you're feeling anxious,
perhaps from low blood pressure,
which can also give symptoms of anxiety,
as we talked about before,
but even if it's independent of low blood pressure,
that slightly increasing sodium intake,
again, I would encourage people to do this
not in the context of processed foods and drinks,
but ideally in the form of maybe a little bit
of sea salt and water or salting one's food
a little bit more, that that can stabilize blood pressure
and one's ability to lean into stressors and challenges.
And I say this because I think that most people assume
that adding salt is always bad,
when in fact that's simply not the case.
There are conditions such as
when we are under stress challenge,
when there is a natural craving for more sodium,
and that natural craving for more sodium
is hardwired into us as a way to meet that challenge.
So it's hard for me to know whether or not people out there,
especially the listeners of this podcast,
are getting too much, just enough, or too little sodium.
So I can't know that, I'm shouting into a tunnel here.
You have to decide how much sodium you are ingesting.
But I think that there's some, for most people,
especially people who are not hypertensive, prehypertensive,
there's some wiggle room to explore
whether more intake of sodium could actually be beneficial
for suppressing some of the anxiety responses
that they might feel under conditions of stress.
Again, more studies need to be done.
Certainly more studies in humans need to be done,
but the relationship between stress and sodium intake
and the fact that additional sodium intake may be beneficial
and indeed is naturally stimulated by stress
shouldn't be necessarily looked at as a pathological event.
I know when some people get stressed,
they crave salty foods.
That's actually a hardwired biological phenomenon
that you see not just in humans, but in animals,
because this is a very primitive mechanism
whereby your body is preparing
to meet any additional challenges and stressors.
Now, we can't have a discussion about sodium
without having a discussion about the other electrolytes,
magnesium and potassium.
Magnesium is important enough
and an extensive enough topic
that we should probably do an entire episode
just on magnesium.
For purposes of today's discussion,
I just will briefly touch on some of the forms of magnesium
that we've discussed on the podcast before
in different contexts.
I want to emphasize that many people
are probably getting enough magnesium in their diet
that they don't need to supplement magnesium.
Some people, however, opt to supplement magnesium
in ways that can support them.
And there are many different forms of magnesium.
And just in very brief passing,
I'll just say that there is some evidence
that you can reduce muscle soreness from exercise
by ingestion of magnesium malate, M-A-L-A-T-E.
I've talked before about magnesium threnate,
T-H-R-E-N-O-A-T-E, magnesium threnate
for sake of promoting the transition into sleep
and for depth of sleep.
And perhaps, again, highlighted perhaps,
because right now it's mainly animal studies
and ongoing human studies, but the data aren't all in,
perhaps magnesium threnate can be used
as a way to support cognitive function and longevity.
That was discussed in the episode
with Dr. Jack Feldman from UCLA.
Typically magnesium threnate is taken 30 or 60 minutes
before bedtime in order to encourage sleep.
You can go to our neural network newsletter
and look for the one on sleep,
and you can see the recommendations,
or I should say the options for that,
because again, you should always check with your physician.
Those aren't strict across the board recommendations.
And then there are other forms of magnesium,
magnesium bisglycinate,
which is a somewhat of an alternative to threnate,
not known to have cognitive enhancing effects,
but seems at least on par with magnesium threnate
in terms of promoting transition
into in-depth of sleep and so on.
There are other forms of magnesium, magnesium citrate,
which has other functions.
Actually magnesium citrate is a fairly effective laxative,
not known to promote sleep and things of that sort.
So a lot of different forms of magnesium,
and there's still other forms out there.
Many people are not getting enough magnesium,
many people are.
Okay, so that's magnesium.
Anytime we're talking about sodium balance,
we have to take into consideration potassium,
because the way that the kidney works
and the way that sodium balance is regulated,
both in the body and the brain,
is that sodium and potassium are working in close concert
with one another.
There are a lot of different recommendations
about ratios out there,
and they range widely from two to one ratio
of potassium to sodium.
I've heard it in the other direction too.
I've heard a two to one sodium to potassium.
The recommendations vary.
One of the sponsors of this podcast, for instance, Element,
which I've talked about in this episode and before,
the ratio there is a gram of sodium
to 200 milligrams of potassium, 60 milligrams of magnesium.
So there they've opted for a five to one ratio
of sodium to potassium.
And of course, many people opt to make their own
hydration electrolyte formulas.
They'll put sea salt into some water,
maybe even ingest a potassium tablet.
It all depends on the context.
An important contextual element is your diet.
So for instance, carbohydrates hold water in the body.
So regardless of how much salt
and how much fluid you're ingesting,
if you're ingesting carbohydrate and you drink fluids,
water, some of that fluid is going to be retained
in the body.
Now, for people that are following low carbohydrate diets,
one of the most immediate effects of a low carbohydrate diet
is that you're going to excrete more water.
And so under those conditions,
you're also going to lose not just water,
but you'll probably also lose sodium and potassium.
And so some people, many people in fact,
find that when they are on a lower or low carbohydrate diet,
then they need to make sure that they're getting enough
sodium and enough potassium.
And some people do that by taking 99 milligram
potassium tablets every time they eat.
Some people do that by ingesting more foods
that contain potassium.
And of course, some people who are on low carbohydrate diets
do ingest vegetables or other forms of food
that carry along with them potassium.
So it's quite variable from person to person.
I mean, you can imagine if carbohydrate holds water,
water and salt balance and potassium go hand in hand
and hand that if you're on a low carbohydrate diet
that you might need to adjust your salt intake and potassium
and conversely, that if you're on a carbohydrate rich diet
or a moderate carbohydrate diet,
then you may need to ingest less sodium and less potassium.
And in fact, a certain amount of water
is probably coming in through the foods you eat as well.
So I don't say all this to confuse you.
Again, I say this because it all depends on the context.
I'll give yet another context that I think
is fairly common nowadays,
which is many people are following a pattern of eating
that more or less resembles intermittent fasting
or at least time restricted feeding.
So they're eating between particular feeding windows.
And then in the certain parts of the 24 hour cycle,
not just sleep,
but during certain parts of their waking cycle,
they're also actively avoiding food banking on,
I think either the possible, I want to say possible
longevity promoting effects of intermittent fasting
or, and or I should say,
they are banking on the fact that for many people,
not eating is easier than portion control
for certain parts of the day.
And so they find it beneficial to limit calories overall
to a given amount, depending on what their goals are
by not consuming food for certain periods of the day.
But usually during those periods of the day,
they're consuming fluids.
And oftentimes those fluids include not just water,
but caffeine and caffeine is a diuretic.
It actually causes the excretion of fluids from the body
in part because it causes the excretion of sodium.
All of that to say that if you're somebody who,
for instance, eats your first meal around noon
or one or 2 p.m. and you're fasting
for the early part of the day
and you're drinking coffee or tea
or ingesting a lot of water,
you are going to be excreting sodium
along with that water.
And so many people, including myself,
find that it's useful,
especially when I'm drinking caffeine
during that so-called fasting or non-food intake
part of time-restricted feeding,
that I'm making sure to get enough salt
either in the form of something like Element,
an electrolyte drink,
or putting some sea salt into some water,
or certainly anytime one is ingesting caffeine,
replacing some of the lost water
by increasing one's water intake.
There are some simple rules of thumb around this
that I think can get most people into a place
where they're more comfortable and functioning better,
which is for every ounce of coffee or tea that you drink,
I should say caffeinated coffee or tea that you drink,
that you consume one and a half times as much water.
So let's say you have an eight-ounce coffee.
Try and drink about, you don't have to be exact,
but try and drink about a 12-ounce glass of water,
and you might want to put a tiny bit of sodium into that.
By tiny bit, I just mean a tiny pinch of sodium.
Because remember, even if we're talking about
increasing the amount of sodium intake overall,
the total amount of sodium contained in salt
is sufficiently high that even just a quarter teaspoon
is going to really start to move that number up
towards that range that's still within the safe range,
but if you keep doing that all day long,
you're very quickly going to get into
that excessive salt intake range
that is deleterious for health.
So again, if you're consuming more caffeine,
you're going to be excreting water and salt and potassium,
and so you're going to have to find ways
to bring water, salt, and potassium back in.
Again, this has to be evaluated
for each of your own individual situations.
If you're exercising fasted,
and you're doing that after drinking caffeine,
then before, during, and certainly after exercise,
you're going to want to replenish the fluids
and electrolytes that you lost, including sodium.
So you can imagine how this all starts
to become pretty dizzying,
and yet it doesn't have to be dizzying.
We can provide some useful ranges
that for most people will work.
And so let's talk about what those ranges are,
and I'm going to point you to a resource
that explores what those ranges are
in these various contexts of nutrition, exercise, and so on.
The resource is a book that was authored
by Dr. James D. Nicolantonio.
He's not a medical doctor.
He's a scientist, studies cardiovascular physiology,
as well, I believe, as a doctor of pharmacy,
and the title of the book is The Salt Fix.
The Salt Fix is an interesting read
because it points to, first of all,
the history of salt in society and as it relates to health.
It actually emphasizes some of the major missteps,
maybe even pretty drastic errors that have been made
in terms of trying to interpret the role
that salt has in various diseases,
and emphasizes some of the ways
in which perhaps increasing salt
can actually improve health outcomes.
And I think it strikes a pretty nice balance
between what's commonly known about salt
and what I believe ought to be known about salt,
or at least taken into consideration.
The book does provide certain recommendations,
and I actually reached out to the author.
I've never met him in person or talked to him directly.
And I asked him outright, I said,
how much salt do you recommend people take on average?
And he gave, of course, the appropriate caveats
about pre-hypertension, hypertension, et cetera,
but made a recommendation, which I'll just share with you.
And if you want to learn more
about the support for this recommendation,
you can check out his book.
The recommendation he made was anywhere
from eight to 12 grams of salt a day,
which corresponds to 3.2 to 4.8 grams of sodium.
So going back to the current recommendations
that we talked about before, 2.3 grams of sodium per day,
this is about one and a half times
to double the amount of sodium
that's currently recommended in most circles.
And then what this corresponds to
is about one and a half to two teaspoons of salt per day
to arrive at that 3.2 to 4.8 grams of sodium.
Again, this is the recommendation that was passed along
for most people, most conditions
barring specific health issues.
Now, what was also interesting is he pointed to
a sodium to potassium ratio,
which is four grams of potassium.
And he also mentioned 400 milligrams of magnesium
and pointed out, and I generally agree here
that many people are deficient in magnesium.
So again, that was a 3.2 to 4.8 grams of sodium,
four grams of potassium.
You might think, well, gosh, that's a one and a half
to two times the current recommendation,
but we can go back to that study
that was mentioned earlier in the episode,
that 2011 study where I described this
sort of J-shaped curve in which when you look at the
occurrence of these negative health events,
they were fairly low at low sodium intake,
lower still at slightly higher sodium intake,
much in line with the recommendations that are made
or that Dr. D. Nicolantonio passed along to me.
And then they increased quite,
those health risks increase quite substantially as one moves
out past six grams of sodium,
seven grams of sodium per day.
That's when things really do seem to get hazardous
and really it makes sense, I think,
given the consensus around this
to really avoid very high salt intake.
So the salt fix describes the rationale
behind those recommendations.
The salt fix also describes in quite beautiful detail
the relationship between salt intake, potassium intake,
and the relationship to the sugar consumption system.
I'd like to pick up on this idea of the relationship
between salt and sugar,
because I think that one key aspect of the way
that salt can work and can benefit us or can harm us
has to do with the way that sodium and sugar are regulated
and actually perceived by the brain
and how under conditions of certain levels of sodium intake,
we might be inspired to seek more sugar
or to crave sweets more or less.
So up until now,
we've been talking about salt as a substance
and a way to regulate fluid balance
and blood volume and so on.
We haven't talked a lot about salt as a taste
or the taste of things that are salty.
And yet we know that we have salt receptors,
meaning neurons that fire action potentials
when salty substances are detected much in the same way
that we have sweet detectors and bitter detectors
and we have detectors of umami,
the savory flavor on our tongue.
And earlier at the beginning of the episode,
I talked about the fact that we have sweet receptors,
neurons that respond to the presence of sugar
or even non-caloric sweet things in the gut
and that signals up to the brain through the vagus nerve
and those signals converge on pathways
that relate to dopamine and so on.
Well, we also have salt sensors at various locations
throughout our digestive tract,
although the sensation and the taste of salt
actually exerts a very robust effect
on certain areas of the brain
that can either make us crave more or sate,
meaning fulfill our desire for salt.
And you can imagine why this would be important.
Your brain actually has to register
whether or not you're bringing in salt
in order to know whether or not
you are going to crave salt more or not.
And beautiful work that's been done by the Zucker Lab,
Z-U-K-E-R, Zucker Lab at Columbia University,
as well as many other labs have used imaging techniques
and other techniques such as molecular biology
to define these so-called parallel pathways.
Parallel meaning pathways that represent sweet
or the presence of sweet taste in the mouth and gut.
Parallel pathways, meaning neural circuits
that represent the presence of salty tastes
in the mouth and gut and so on.
And that those go into the brain,
move up through brain stem centers
and up to the neocortex,
indeed where our seat of our conscious perception is
to give us a sense and a perception of the components
of the foods that we happen to be ingesting
and a sense and a perception of the fluids
and the components of those fluids
that we happen to be ingesting.
Now, parallel pathways, as I'm describing them,
are a fundamental feature of every sensory system,
not just the taste system, but also the visual system.
We have parallel pathways for perceiving dark objects
versus light objects, for perceiving red versus green,
et cetera.
This is a fundamental feature of how we are built
and how our nervous system works.
And in the taste system, much like in these other systems,
these pathways are indeed parallel,
but they converge and they can influence one another.
And I think the simplest way to put this
is in the context first of the visual system,
whereby your ability to detect the color red
has everything to do with the fact
that you have neurons in your eye
that absorb long wavelengths of light that we call reds,
red wavelengths of light,
which are longer wavelengths than say blue light,
which is shorter wavelength.
But it is really the comparison of the electrical activity
of the neurons that absorb red light
with the activity of the neurons that absorb green light,
which actually gives you the perception of red.
So that might seem a little counterintuitive,
but indeed it's not.
It's actually because something is red
and has less greenness
that we perceive it as more red than the green.
And this is actually the way
that your entire nervous system works,
is that we aren't really good
at evaluating absolute levels of anything
in the context of perception.
It's only by comparison.
And actually there's a fun experiment that you can do.
I think you could probably find it easily online.
You could also do this experiment at home.
You can stare at something that's red
or green for that matter for a while.
So you make an active decision to not blink
and to stare at something that's red.
And then you look away from that thing
and you'll actually see a green after image
of that red object.
Conversely, if you look at something that's green for a while
and you stare at it and you look away,
you will see the red after image of that thing.
Now the taste system doesn't have
quite the same aftertaste type effect,
but nonetheless, the pathways,
the parallel pathways for salty
and the parallel pathways for sweet and bitter and so on
can actually interact.
And this has important relevance
in the context of food choices and sugar craving.
One of the things that's commonplace nowadays
is in many processed foods, there is a business,
literally a business of putting so-called hidden sugars.
And these hidden sugars are not always
in the form of caloric sugars.
They're sometimes in the form of artificial sweeteners
into various foods.
And you might say, well, why would they put more sugar
into a food and then disguise the sugary taste
given that sweet tastes often compel people
to eat more of these things?
Well, it's a way actually of bypassing
some of the homeostatic mechanisms for sweet.
Even though we might think that the more sweet stuff we eat,
the more sweet stuff we crave,
in general, people have a threshold whereby they say,
okay, I've had enough sugary stuff.
You can actually experience this
if you ever feel like something is really, really sweet.
Take a little sip of water
with a little bit of lemon juice in it or vinegar
and it will quickly quench
that overly sweet sensation or perception.
It will disappear almost immediately.
There's actually a practice in fancy meals
of cleansing the palate
through the ingestion of different foods.
And that's the same idea that you're cleansing the palate.
You're actually neutralizing the previous taste
so then they can bring yet another dish
to overindulge you in decadence and so forth.
So these sensory systems interact in this way.
By putting sugars into foods
and hiding the sugary taste of those foods,
those foods, even if they contain artificial sweeteners,
can activate the sorts of neurons
that we talked about at the beginning of the episode,
like the neuropod cells
that will then signal to the brain to release more dopamine
and make you crave more of that food.
Whereas had you been able to perceive
the true sweetness of that food,
you might've consumed less and indeed that's what happens.
So these hidden sugars are kind of diabolical.
Why am I talking about all of this
in the context of an episode on salt?
Well, as many of you have probably noticed,
a lot of foods out there
contain a salty-sweet combination,
and it's that combination of salty and sweet
which can actually lead you to consume more
of the salty-sweet food than you would have
if it had just been sweet or it had just been salty.
And that's because both sweet taste and salty taste
have a homeostatic balance.
So if you ingest something that's very, very salty,
pretty soon your appetite for salty foods will be reduced.
But if you mask some of that with sweet,
well, because of the interactions of these parallel pathways
you somewhat shut down your perception
of how much salt you're ingesting,
or conversely, by ingesting some salt with sweet foods,
you mask some of the sweetness
of the sweet foods that you're tasting
and you will continue to indulge in those foods.
So salty-sweet interactions can be very diabolical,
they can also be very tasty,
but they can be very diabolical
in terms of inspiring you to eat more of a particular food
than you would otherwise
if you were just following your homeostatic salt
or your homeostatic sugar balance systems.
And the beautiful imaging work
that's been done by the Zucker Lab and other labs
has actually been able to reveal
how some of this might work by showing, for instance,
that a certain ensemble, meaning a certain group of neurons,
is activated by a sweet taste
and a non-overlapping distinct set of neurons just nearby,
sitting cheek to jowl with those other neurons,
would be activated by salty tastes
and yet others by bitter taste, et cetera.
So there's a separate map
of these different parallel pathways,
but that when foods or fluids are ingested
that are both salty and sweet,
you get a yet entirely different
ensemble of neurons activated.
So your brain, whether or not it's for your visual system
or your auditory system or your taste system,
has a way of representing the pure form of taste,
salty, sweet, bitter, et cetera,
and has a way of representing their combinations.
And food manufacturers have exploited this to large degree.
I mention all of this because if you're somebody
who's looking to explore either increasing
or decreasing your sodium intake for health benefits,
for performance benefits,
in many ways, it is useful to do that
in the context of a fairly pure,
meaning unprocessed food intake background,
whether or not that's keto, carnivore, omnivore,
intermittent fasting or what have you,
it doesn't really matter.
But the closer that foods are to their basic form and taste,
meaning not combinations of large amounts of ingredients
and certainly avoiding highly processed foods,
the more quickly you're going to be able to hone in
on your specific salt appetite and salt needs,
which as I've pointed out numerous times
throughout this episode are going to vary
from person to person, depending on nutrition,
depending on activity, depending on hormone status,
or even portion of your menstrual cycle for that matter.
So if you want to hone in
on the appropriate amount of sodium for you,
yes, blood pressure is going to be an important metric
to pay attention to as you go along.
And the parameters for healthy blood pressure ranges
are readily available online.
So I'll let you refer to those
in order to determine those for yourself.
But in determining whether or not increasing
your salt intake might be beneficial
for, for instance, for reducing anxiety a bit
or for increasing blood pressure
to offset some of these postural syndromes
where you get dizzy, et cetera,
for improving sports performance or cognitive performance,
I can only recommend that you do this
in a fairly clean context
where you're not trying to do this
by ingesting a bunch of salty foods
or salty sweet foods, et cetera.
And indeed, many people find, and it's reviewed a bit,
and some of the data are reviewed in the book,
The Salt Fix, that when people increase their salt intake
in a backdrop of relatively unprocessed foods,
that sugar cravings can indeed be vastly reduced.
And that makes sense given the way
that these neural pathways for salty and sweet interact.
Now, thus far, I've already covered quite a lot of material,
but I would be completely remiss
if I didn't emphasize the crucial role
that sodium plays in the way that neurons function.
In fact, sodium is one of the key elements
that allows neurons to function at all.
And that's by way of engaging
what we call the action potential.
The action potential is the firing
of electrical activity by neurons.
Neurons can engage electrical activity
in a number of different ways.
They have graded potentials, they have gap junctions.
There's a whole landscape
of different electrophysiologies of neurons
that I don't want to go into just yet.
At least not in this episode.
But the action potential is the fundamental way
in which neurons communicate with one another.
They're sometimes called spikes.
It's just kind of nomenclature that neuroscientists use.
I'm just going to briefly describe the action potential
and the role that sodium plays.
And this will involve a little bit of chemistry,
but I promise it will be accessible to anyone,
even if you don't have a chemistry or a physics background
or electrophysiology background.
Neurons have an inside and an outside.
And inside are things like your genetic material.
They have a bunch of things floating around in there
that allow those cells to function.
And they tend to have this wire extending out of them,
sometimes a very long wire,
sometimes a short one that we call the axon.
And at the end of that wire, that axon,
they release little packets of chemicals
that either cause the next neuron to fire action potentials
or prevent the next neuron from firing action potential.
So they kind of vomit out these little packets of chemicals
that either inspire or suppress action potentials
in other neurons.
The way that that whole process occurs
is that a given neuron needs to change
its electrical activity.
So normally neurons are hanging out
and they have what we call a negative charge.
And the reason they have a negative charge
is that the inside of the cell
has things floating around in it,
like potassium, a little bit of sodium
and some stuff like chloride.
These are literally just,
just imagine these as little balls of stuff.
And if they have a negative charge on them,
then the inside of the cell
is going to tend to be more negative.
And outside of the cell, it turns out
you're going to have a bunch of stuff
that's positively charged.
And one of the main factors
in creating that positive charge is sodium.
Sodium carries a positive charge.
So you have neurons that you can just imagine,
for sake of this discussion,
you can just imagine as a sphere
with a little wire sticking out of it.
They, you can put a little minus on the inside for negative.
You can put a little plus on the outside for positive.
And when that neuron is stimulated by another neuron,
if the stimulation, the electrical stimulation
is sufficiently high,
meaning enough little packets of neurotransmitter
have been vomited onto its surface
at sufficient concentration,
what happens is little pores, little spaces,
little gaps open up in the membrane of that cell
that separates the inside from the outside.
And because it's positive,
there's a lot of positive charge outside
and there's a lot of negative inside.
It's like a boulder running downhill.
All this stuff tends to rush downhill.
It tries to create even amounts of charge.
So it's negative on the inside, positive on the outside.
And what happens is sodium rushes into the cell,
carrying a lot of charge into the cell.
And as a consequence,
the charge of that cell goes from negative,
actually very negative, to quite positive.
And if it hits a certain threshold of positive charge
because of all the sodium ions going into the cell,
then it fires what's called an action potential.
And it vomits out its own set of chemicals
onto the next neuron.
And so it sets off a chain of one neuron
goes from negative to positive,
vomits out chemicals onto the next one.
The next neuron that binds to receptors or enters the cell
and that cell goes from negative to positive charge,
vomits its contents onto the next cell
and so on and so forth.
Sodium rushing into the cell, therefore,
is the way that the action potential is stimulated.
In other words, sodium is the way
that neurons communicate with one another.
Now, the neurons don't stay in a positive charge,
otherwise they would just keep vomiting out their contents.
But they need to maintain some of that
and they need to go back to preparing to do it
the next time and the next time by resting a bit.
And it turns out that the way they restore their charge
is by pushing that sodium back out of the cell,
there are mechanisms in place to do that,
things like the so-called sodium potassium pump.
There's a change in the levels of potassium
across the cell membrane and so on and so forth.
If you want to look at a demonstration of this,
you can put into a web browser the action potential.
You'll find some beautiful descriptions there
on YouTube and elsewhere.
Maybe some time on Instagram,
I'll do a description with a diagram
because I realize a number of people
are just listening to this.
I can't do that here.
I won't do that here because I want everyone
to be able to get the same amount of material
regardless of whether or not they're watching
and or listening to this.
But the point I'd like to make,
at least as it relates to this episode on salt,
is that having sufficient levels of salt in your system
allows your brain to function,
allows your nervous system to function at all.
Again, this is the most basic aspect
of nervous system function.
And there are cases where this whole system gets disrupted.
And that brings us to the topic of sodium and water balance.
As many of you have probably heard,
but hopefully if you haven't,
you'll take this message seriously.
If you drink too much water,
especially in a short amount of time,
you can actually kill yourself, right?
And we certainly don't want that to happen.
If you ingest a lot of water in a very short period of time,
something called the hypernatremia,
you will excrete a lot of sodium very quickly
and your ability to regulate kidney function
will be disrupted.
But in addition to that,
your brain can actually stop functioning.
So people have actually consumed water to excess,
especially after sports events and so forth.
And if that water doesn't contain sufficient electrolytes,
you can actually shut down neurons' ability
to function at all by disrupting this balance
of sodium and potassium
and the amount of extracellular sodium
and neurons' ability to signal to one another
through action potentials.
And I can't emphasize the importance
of action potentials enough.
They are the way that I can lift my pen right now.
They're the way that I can speak.
They're the way that you breathe.
They literally control all aspects
of your nervous system function.
Now, it takes quite a lot of water intake
before you excrete enough sodium
that your nervous system is going to shut down.
And I certainly don't want to give the impression
that simply by ingesting more sodium,
your neurons will work better,
but it absolutely is the case
that if you don't ingest enough sodium,
that your neurons won't function as well as they could,
and that if your sodium levels are made too low
by hemorrhage or by ingesting so much water, fluid,
that you excrete excess amounts of sodium
or through any other mechanism, that is,
then indeed your neurons won't be able
to fire action potentials,
and your brain and nervous system simply won't work.
And that's one of the primary reasons
why dehydration leads to confusion
and dizziness and lack of coordination.
And I've talked about this a bit
in the episode on endurance,
but there are instances in which competitive athletes
have come into the stadium to finish a final lap
of a long endurance race and are completely disoriented
and actually can't find their way to the finish line.
It might sound like kind of a silly, crazy example,
but there are examples of people having severe mental issues
and physical issues post-exercise
when that exercise involved a ton of sweating
or hot environments or insufficient ingestion of fluids
and electrolytes because included
in the electrolyte formula, of course, is sodium.
And as you just learned,
sodium is absolutely crucial for neurons to function.
So to briefly recap some of what I've talked about today,
we talked about how the brain monitors
the amount of salt in your brain and body
and how that relates to thirst
and the drive to consume more fluid and or salty fluids.
We also talked a little bit about the hormones
that come from the brain and operate at the level
of the kidney in order to either retain
or allow water to leave your system.
We talked a little bit about the function
of the kidney itself, a beautiful organ.
We talked about the relationship between salt intake
and various health parameters
and how a particular range of salt intake might be optimal
depending on the context in which
that range is being consumed,
meaning depending on whether or not you're hypertensive,
pre-hypertensive, or normal tension.
We talked about fluid intake and electrolyte intake,
so sodium, potassium, and magnesium
in the context of athletic or sports performance,
but also in terms of maintaining cognitive function.
Talked about the Galpin equation,
which you could easily adapt to your body weight
and to your circumstances.
Of course, adjusting the amount of fluid
and electrolyte intake upwards if you're exercising
or working in very hot environments,
downwards maybe if you're in less hot environments
where you're sweating less and so on.
We also talked about the relationship
between the stress system and the salt craving system
and why those two systems interact
and why for some people who may suffer a bit from anxiety
or under conditions of stress,
increasing salt intake provided it's done
through healthy means might actually be beneficial.
We also talked about conditions
in which increasing salt intake might be beneficial
for offsetting low blood pressure
and some of these postural syndromes
that can lead people to dizziness and so forth.
These are things that have to be explored
on an individual basis and of course have to be explored
with the support of your doctor.
I mentioned the salt fix,
which I think is an interesting read,
keeping in mind that a lot of the information in there
runs counter to the typical narrative
that you hear around salt,
but nonetheless has some very interesting points
that you might want to consider
and certainly will broaden your view of the history of
and the applications of salt
as it relates to a great number
of health and performance metrics.
We also talked about the perception of salt,
meaning the perception of salty tastes
and how the perception of salty tastes
and the perception of other tastes like sweet
can interact with one another
to drive things like increased sugar intake
when you're not even aware of it.
And indeed how the combination of salty and sweet tastes
can bias you towards craving more,
for instance, processed foods
and why that might be a good thing to avoid.
And of course, we talked about salt
and its critical role in the action potential,
the fundamental way in which
the nervous system functions at all.
So my hope for you in listening to this episode
is that you consider a question and that question is
what salt intake is best for you
and that you place that question
in the context of your fluid intake,
you place that in the context of the diet you're following,
the amount of caffeine you might be ingesting
and the diuretic effects of caffeine
and crucially that you place that in the context
of the electrolytes more generally,
meaning sodium, potassium, and magnesium.
Someday there will be an online program or an app I imagine
where one could put a bunch of different parameters in
about their particular health status,
their particular diet, their particular exercise, et cetera.
Maybe it would all be run by AI algorithm or something
where it would monitor all of that for us
and then it would spit out for us a precise amount of sodium
that we should take in each day.
Unfortunately, no such tool or device exists right now
and so all of us have to figure out
the appropriate amount of sodium intake for ourselves
and that has to be done
under these contextual considerations.
Who knows, maybe one of you will design such an app
or such a device, I think it would be very useful.
If nothing else, today's discussion ought to illuminate
the fact that some strict recommendation of salt intake
cannot be made universally across the board for everybody.
There's just simply no way that could be done
and yet I think most of what we've learned about salt
in the general discussions around health
are that it's this evil substance.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
It's an incredible substance.
Our physiology is dependent on it.
Our cognition is dependent on it.
Indeed, our mental and physical health and our performance
in essentially all aspects of life is dependent on it
and I hope I've been able to illuminate
some of the beautiful ways in which the brain
and the bodily organs interact
in order to help us regulate this thing
that we call sodium balance
and the fact that we have neurons in our brain
that are both tuned to the levels of salt in our body
and positioned in a location in the brain
that allows them to detect the levels of salt in our body
and to drive the intake of more or less salt
and more or less fluid and other electrolytes
really just points to the beauty of the system
that we've all evolved
that allows us to interact with our environment
and make adjustments according to the context
of our daily and ongoing life.
If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Spotify and or Apple.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five star review
and you can also leave us a comment.
The best place to leave us comments, however,
is on the YouTube channel.
There you can make suggestions about future podcast guests
that you'd like us to interview,
future podcast topics that you'd like us to cover
and of course you can give us feedback
about the content of this or other podcasts.
We do read all those comments.
Please also check out our sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of today's episode.
That's the best way to support this podcast.
We also have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
During today's episode and on many previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them
for things like enhancing sleep and focus and so on.
One issue with supplements, however,
is that the quality of supplements varies tremendously
from one brand to the next.
For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne supplements are of the absolute
highest quality in terms of the ingredients they include
and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients
they include, meaning what's listed on the bottle
is what's actually contained in that product.
They've partnered with all the major sports teams
and with the Mayo Clinic, so trust is very, very high
with respect to the quality of Thorne products.
If you'd like to see the Thorne supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne, that's thorne.com slash the letter U
slash Huberman, and you can get 20% off
any of those Thorne supplements.
In addition, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site
through that portal, thorne.com slash U slash Huberman,
you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
If you're not already following Huberman Lab
on Instagram and Twitter, please do so.
There, I cover science and science-based tools
that sometimes overlaps with the content of this podcast,
but sometimes is distinct from the content of this podcast.
We also have a neural network newsletter.
The neural network newsletter comes out once a month.
It is zero cost.
You sign up for it by providing your email.
We do not share your email with anybody.
The privacy policy is made very clear,
and you can sign up for the neural network newsletter
by going to HubermanLab.com.
Just go into the menu, scroll down to neural network,
and you can sign up, and even without signing up,
you can access some of the previous newsletters
if you'd like to see what they are like.
We include short summaries from podcasts,
some key takeaways, and some resources and tools
that you won't find anywhere else.
Thank you once again for joining me today
to discuss the neuroscience and the physiology around salt
and its many incredible influences on our brain and body.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
And I'll see you next time.